<!--
id: 30674773571
link: http://blog.olgabotvinnik.com/post/30674773571/ziv-bar-joseph-marathons-and-computational-biology
slug: ziv-bar-joseph-marathons-and-computational-biology
date: Wed Jul 18 2012 09:52:00 GMT-0700 (PDT)
raw: {"blog_name":"sciencemeetproductivity","id":30674773571,"post_url":"http://blog.olgabotvinnik.com/post/30674773571/ziv-bar-joseph-marathons-and-computational-biology","slug":"ziv-bar-joseph-marathons-and-computational-biology","type":"text","date":"2012-07-18 16:52:00 GMT","timestamp":1342630320,"state":"published","format":"markdown","reblog_key":"qPm3dz9s","tags":[],"short_url":"http://tmblr.co/ZStENuSaM_P3","highlighted":[],"note_count":0,"title":"Ziv Bar-Joseph: Marathons and computational biology","body":"<div class=\"posterous_autopost\"><div class=\"p_embed p_image_embed\"> <a href=\"http://getfile1.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-07-18/oFrydnHtzEdskcpbvmqIocvhIuCyDlhrbtabjjmIjcgBcFyCfucxjxIqmFnI/run.jpg.scaled1000.jpg\" target=\"_blank\"><img alt=\"Run\" height=\"375\" src=\"http://getfile9.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-07-18/oFrydnHtzEdskcpbvmqIocvhIuCyDlhrbtabjjmIjcgBcFyCfucxjxIqmFnI/run.jpg.scaled500.jpg\" width=\"500\"/></a> </div>   <p class=\"p1\" style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 15px 0px 18px; color: #333333; font-family: Georgia, Times New Roman, Times, serif; font-size: 14px; line-height: 22px; text-align: justify;\">The largest computational biology conference in the world is happening just finished in Long Beach, CA, and I had the privilege of being here to witness its 20th anniversary.<a href=\"http://www.iscb.org/ismb2012\" style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 0px; color: #000000;\" target=\"_blank\"> Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology (ISMB)</a> Is a fantastic conference, and one of the great aspects of this conference is the <a href=\"http://www.iscb.org/iscb-awards/overton-prize\" style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 0px; color: #000000;\" target=\"_blank\">Overton Prize</a>, which honors the contributions of early-career computational biologists, typically those who are within 3-5 years of their first professorship, and are typically untenured. This year, the Overton prize winner is <a href=\"http://www.iscb.org/iscb-awards/1224\" style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 0px; color: #000000;\" target=\"_blank\">Ziv Bar-Joseph</a>, <a href=\"http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~zivbj/\" style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 0px; color: #000000;\" target=\"_blank\">assistant professor at Carnegie-Mellon University</a> and avid runner. </p>  <p class=\"p1\" style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 15px 0px 18px; color: #333333; font-family: Georgia, Times New Roman, Times, serif; font-size: 14px; line-height: 22px; text-align: justify;\">Bar-Joseph&#8217;s love of running is often mentioned in his talks, but I think it is extremely relevant to his career as a scientist. He has the dedication to run nearly every day <em style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 0px;\">and</em> have a very substantial research portfolio. In short, Bar-Joseph has mastered the art of balancing life and work. </p>  <p class=\"p1\" style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 15px 0px 18px; color: #333333; font-family: Georgia, Times New Roman, Times, serif; font-size: 14px; line-height: 22px; text-align: justify;\">To encourage young scientists, he analogized his success to a 50-mile run he recently finished. He showed the racecourse and a photo of himself smiling with an age-group award, saying that his smiling face doesn&#8217;t tell the whole story. Just as when you see the CVs of people who win awards like the Overton, you see an intimidating list of papers, accolades, and accomplishments. But a CV is just the end result.</p>    <p class=\"p2\" style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 15px 0px 18px; color: #333333; font-family: Georgia, Times New Roman, Times, serif; font-size: 14px; line-height: 22px; text-align: justify;\"><span style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 0px; font-size: medium;\"><strong style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 0px;\">What happened along the way?</strong></span></p>  <p class=\"p1\" style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 15px 0px 18px; color: #333333; font-family: Georgia, Times New Roman, Times, serif; font-size: 14px; line-height: 22px; text-align: justify;\">He then showed a photo of himself at the 20-mile mark, looking decidedly unhappy. He said, &#8220;there is struggle that you do not see when you just see the end the final results.&#8221; He had lost his glasses at the beginning of the race, so he could not see the signposts he was supposed to follow. So he wandered around for five miles without knowing where he was, and then he finally hit the 20-mile mark and realized he had wandered around fruitlessly. Frustrated, but he persevered and went on to win his age category.</p>    <p class=\"p1\" style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 15px 0px 18px; color: #333333; font-family: Georgia, Times New Roman, Times, serif; font-size: 14px; line-height: 22px; text-align: justify;\"><span style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 0px; font-size: medium;\"><strong style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 0px;\">Perseverance, or &#8220;Stick-to-it-ive-ness&#8221; as my middle school teacher called it</strong></span></p>  <p class=\"p1\" style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 15px 0px 18px; color: #333333; font-family: Georgia, Times New Roman, Times, serif; font-size: 14px; line-height: 22px; text-align: justify;\">His message was simple: perseverance. Maybe you have a similar experience in your past, present, or future, where you thought you were getting somewhere only to realize later on that time was wasted. But in reality, it wasn&#8217;t wasted. Those extra five miles Bar-Joseph ran made him stronger for the next race, and those few months (or years) you spent mastering a technique taught you diligence and patience, skills that will serve you far better than any single technique.</p>    <p class=\"p1\" style=\"padding: 0px; margin: 15px 0px 18px; color: #333333; font-family: Georgia, Times New Roman, Times, serif; font-size: 14px; line-height: 22px; text-align: justify;\">More on Bar-Joseph and his fellow Overton Prize colleagues soon.</p>  </div>"}
publish: 2012-07-018
tags: 
title: Ziv Bar-Joseph: Marathons and computational biology
-->


Ziv Bar-Joseph: Marathons and computational biology
===================================================

[![Run](http://getfile9.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-07-18/oFrydnHtzEdskcpbvmqIocvhIuCyDlhrbtabjjmIjcgBcFyCfucxjxIqmFnI/run.jpg.scaled500.jpg)](http://getfile1.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-07-18/oFrydnHtzEdskcpbvmqIocvhIuCyDlhrbtabjjmIjcgBcFyCfucxjxIqmFnI/run.jpg.scaled1000.jpg)

The largest computational biology conference in the world is happening
just finished in Long Beach, CA, and I had the privilege of being here
to witness its 20th anniversary.[ Intelligent Systems for Molecular
Biology (ISMB)](http://www.iscb.org/ismb2012) Is a fantastic conference,
and one of the great aspects of this conference is the [Overton
Prize](http://www.iscb.org/iscb-awards/overton-prize), which honors the
contributions of early-career computational biologists, typically those
who are within 3-5 years of their first professorship, and are typically
untenured. This year, the Overton prize winner is [Ziv
Bar-Joseph](http://www.iscb.org/iscb-awards/1224), [assistant professor
at Carnegie-Mellon University](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~zivbj/) and avid
runner. 

Bar-Joseph’s love of running is often mentioned in his talks, but I
think it is extremely relevant to his career as a scientist. He has the
dedication to run nearly every day *and* have a very substantial
research portfolio. In short, Bar-Joseph has mastered the art of
balancing life and work. 

To encourage young scientists, he analogized his success to a 50-mile
run he recently finished. He showed the racecourse and a photo of
himself smiling with an age-group award, saying that his smiling face
doesn’t tell the whole story. Just as when you see the CVs of people who
win awards like the Overton, you see an intimidating list of papers,
accolades, and accomplishments. But a CV is just the end result.

**What happened along the way?**

He then showed a photo of himself at the 20-mile mark, looking decidedly
unhappy. He said, “there is struggle that you do not see when you just
see the end the final results.” He had lost his glasses at the beginning
of the race, so he could not see the signposts he was supposed to
follow. So he wandered around for five miles without knowing where he
was, and then he finally hit the 20-mile mark and realized he had
wandered around fruitlessly. Frustrated, but he persevered and went on
to win his age category.

**Perseverance, or “Stick-to-it-ive-ness” as my middle school teacher
called it**

His message was simple: perseverance. Maybe you have a similar
experience in your past, present, or future, where you thought you were
getting somewhere only to realize later on that time was wasted. But in
reality, it wasn’t wasted. Those extra five miles Bar-Joseph ran made
him stronger for the next race, and those few months (or years) you
spent mastering a technique taught you diligence and patience, skills
that will serve you far better than any single technique.

More on Bar-Joseph and his fellow Overton Prize colleagues soon.

